Chapter Four: Data Representation, Analysis, and Interpretation

4.1 Identification and Analysis of Factors Associated with Hypertension

To identify and analyze factors associated with hypertension among adults in Uganda, statistical tests were employed. Chi-square tests were used for categorical variables while independent t-tests were used for numeric variables. Significant associations were found between hypertension and family history (parent: p < 0.001; sibling: p = 0.002), smoking status (p = 0.015), alcohol consumption (p = 0.008), salt consumption (p < 0.001), and education level (p = 0.023). For numeric variables, age showed a strong association with hypertension (p < 0.001), with older adults more likely to be hypertensive. Additionally, low consumption of fruits and vegetables was also associated with increased hypertension risk (p = 0.042).

4.2 Development of the Predictive Model

The predictive model was developed using a dataset preprocessed to handle missing values, encode categorical variables, and standardize numeric features. Two models were evaluated: Random Forest and Logistic Regression. Label encoding was applied to categorical variables, missing values in numeric fields were filled with medians, and features such as age and servings of fruits/vegetables were standardized using StandardScaler.

The Random Forest classifier was optimized using GridSearchCV with the following hyperparameter ranges: n_estimators (100, 200), max_depth (10, 20, None), and min_samples_split (2, 5). This model is an ensemble learning method that builds multiple decision trees during training and outputs the class that is the mode of the classes (classification) of the individual trees. Each tree in the forest considers a random subset of features when splitting nodes, which helps reduce overfitting and improve generalization.

Features used in the model included both numerical and encoded categorical variables such as Age, Gender, Marital Status, Education Level, Income Bracket, Smoking Status, Alcohol Consumption, Physical Activity, Sleep Duration, Salt Intake Frequency, Fruit and Vegetable Servings (converted to servings_numeric), Family History (parent, sibling, other), and other lifestyle and clinical indicators.

The model works by aggregating predictions from each decision tree. For any given input, each tree predicts whether the individual is hypertensive or not. The final prediction is based on a majority vote across all trees. The Random Forest also provides a feature importance measure which helps identify which variables contributed most to the prediction.

On the validation dataset, the Random Forest model achieved an accuracy of 93%, precision of 96%, recall of 75%, F1-score of 81%, and AUC-ROC of 0.75. These metrics indicate good predictive capability, especially in terms of minimizing false positives.

4.3 Evaluation of the Developed Model

The model was evaluated using a held-out test set comprising 20% of the original dataset. The Random Forest achieved strong performance: accuracy of 97%, precision of 98%, recall of 88%, F1-score of 92%, and AUC-ROC of 0.88. These results show the model's high ability to distinguish between hypertensive and non-hypertensive individuals.

In contrast, the Logistic Regression model, though interpretable and computationally efficient, yielded lower metrics: accuracy of 78%, F1-score of 75%, and AUC-ROC of 0.83.

Five-fold cross-validation confirmed the robustness of the Random Forest model, producing an average F1-score of 0.81 with a standard deviation of 0.18. Feature importance analysis revealed that age, family history (particularly parental), and salt intake were the top predictors.

The model’s predictions were visualized using a confusion matrix, which showed balanced true positive and true negative rates. Feature importance was also plotted, offering insights into the contribution of each variable. The model and scaler were serialized using joblib and exported for use in a Flask-based web application, supporting real-time hypertension risk prediction in clinical settings.














SECOND VERSION










Chapter Four: Data Representation, Analysis, and Interpretation

4.1 Identification and Analysis of Factors Associated with Hypertension

To identify and analyze factors associated with hypertension among adults in Uganda, statistical tests were employed. Chi-square tests were used for categorical variables while independent t-tests were used for numeric variables. Significant associations were found between hypertension and family history (parent: p < 0.001; sibling: p = 0.002), smoking status (p = 0.015), alcohol consumption (p = 0.008), salt consumption (p < 0.001), and education level (p = 0.023). For numeric variables, age showed a strong association with hypertension (p < 0.001), with older adults more likely to be hypertensive. Additionally, low consumption of fruits and vegetables was also associated with increased hypertension risk (p = 0.042).

4.2 Development of the Predictive Model

4.2.1 The Hypertension Prediction Model

The developed predictive model for hypertension is a Random Forest Classifier, trained on a dataset of adult individuals assessed for multiple lifestyle, demographic, and health-related features. The model is designed to receive preprocessed input features and predict the binary outcome: presence (1) or absence (0) of hypertension.

The input features used by the model are as follows:

Age (standardized numeric)

Gender (encoded)

Marital Status (encoded)

Education Level (encoded)

Income Bracket (encoded)

Smoking Status (encoded)

Alcohol Consumption (encoded)

Physical Activity Level (encoded)

Sleep Duration (encoded)

Salt Intake Frequency (encoded)

Fruit and Vegetable Servings (converted to servings_numeric)

Family History: Parent (binary)

Family History: Sibling (binary)

Family History: Other Relative (binary)

Each instance (row of input data) is passed through multiple decision trees. Each tree makes a classification (hypertensive or not), and the final decision is based on majority voting across all trees.

Model Function

Let  be the input vector representing the features described above. Each decision tree  in the Random Forest independently produces a prediction . The final model prediction  is given by:

where  is the total number of decision trees in the ensemble.

Model Storage and Deployment

The trained model was serialized using the joblib package and saved as hypertension_model.pkl. This file contains the full learned structure of the Random Forest and can be used in any Python environment to load and reuse the model without retraining. Alongside the model, the StandardScaler object used for feature scaling was also saved as scaler.pkl.

The model is structured to be deployed as a back-end inference service, which accepts new data inputs, applies the saved scaler for normalization, and produces a risk prediction. This setup enables real-time predictions in an online system or clinic-based application.

Model Output

Upon receiving input data, the model outputs either 1 (indicating hypertension is likely) or 0 (no hypertension detected), based on the majority vote from the ensemble. It can also provide the probability score for each class using the .predict_proba() function, allowing threshold-based sensitivity adjustment in different clinical settings.









BETTER VERSION

Chapter Four: Data Representation, Analysis, and Interpretation

4.1 Identification and Analysis of Factors Associated with Hypertension

To identify and analyze factors associated with hypertension among adults in Uganda, statistical tests were employed. Chi-square tests were used for categorical variables while independent t-tests were used for numeric variables. Significant associations were found between hypertension and family history (parent: p < 0.001; sibling: p = 0.002), smoking status (p = 0.015), alcohol consumption (p = 0.008), salt consumption (p < 0.001), and education level (p = 0.023). For numeric variables, age showed a strong association with hypertension (p < 0.001), with older adults more likely to be hypertensive. Additionally, low consumption of fruits and vegetables was also associated with increased hypertension risk (p = 0.042).

4.2 Development of the Predictive Model

To meet the second objective of this study, two classification models were developed and evaluated for their effectiveness in predicting hypertension. The models selected for comparison were Logistic Regression and Random Forest Classifier. Both models were trained on the same dataset after standard preprocessing procedures, including handling missing values, encoding categorical variables, and scaling numerical features.

The Logistic Regression model was selected due to its widespread use in medical data analysis and its interpretability. However, when evaluated on validation and test data, it demonstrated limited capacity in capturing the complexity of the feature interactions present in the dataset. In contrast, the Random Forest model—a more advanced ensemble learning method—outperformed Logistic Regression on all performance metrics, including accuracy, F1-score, recall, and area under the ROC curve.

After cross-validation and testing, the Random Forest Classifier was selected as the primary model due to its superior performance and robustness. The following sections describe the selected model in detail.

4.2.1 The Hypertension Prediction Model

The final predictive model for hypertension is a Random Forest Classifier, trained on adult individual data containing a variety of demographic, lifestyle, and medical history features. The purpose of the model is to accurately determine whether an individual is likely to be hypertensive based on their responses to a structured health questionnaire.

Model Features

The model utilizes the following input features:

Age (standardized numeric)

Gender (encoded)

Marital Status (encoded)

Education Level (encoded)

Employment Status (encoded)

Household Income (encoded)

Smoking Status (encoded)

Smoking Frequency (encoded)

Alcohol Consumption (encoded)

Physical Activity Level (encoded)

Sleep Duration (encoded)

Salt Intake Frequency (encoded)

Hypertension History (binary)

Presence of Chronic Diseases (binary)

Medication Status (binary)

Experienced Symptoms (binary)

Frequency of Hospital Visits (encoded)

Health Care Service Type (encoded)

Blood Pressure Monitoring (binary)

Frequency of Monitoring (encoded)

Fruit and Vegetable Servings (converted to numeric)

Family History (parent, sibling, other relative – all binary)

These features were selected to reflect both clinical risk indicators and lifestyle behaviors relevant to hypertension.

Model Structure and Operation

The Random Forest algorithm constructs an ensemble of decision trees, each trained on a random subset of the data and features. Each tree provides a classification prediction (hypertensive or not), and the final output is determined by majority voting across all trees.

Mathematically, let  be the input vector representing the features. Each decision tree  in the Random Forest produces a prediction . The final model output  is given by:

where  is the number of trees in the ensemble.

Model Performance

The Random Forest model achieved high predictive performance on the validation and test datasets. On the validation set, it recorded an accuracy of 93%, precision of 96%, recall of 75%, F1-score of 81%, and an AUC-ROC of 0.75. When evaluated on the held-out test set, the model showed even better generalization with an accuracy of 97%, precision of 98%, recall of 88%, F1-score of 92%, and AUC-ROC of 0.88.

Cross-validation further confirmed the model's stability, yielding an average F1-score of 0.81 with modest variation across folds. These results indicate that the model is both reliable and robust across different subsets of data.

Model Output

The model produces a binary classification output: 1 if hypertension is predicted, and 0 otherwise. Additionally, the probability of the positive class (hypertension) is provided, allowing practitioners to apply thresholds for decision-making tailored to specific risk levels.

4.2.2 Model Deployment in a Web Application

To ensure the practical application of the model, it was deployed as a web application using Flask. The application loads the trained model and scaler, accepts user inputs via a form, applies the required preprocessing steps, and outputs the prediction result.

Example snippet of the prediction logic:

model = joblib.load('hypertension_model.pkl')
scaler = joblib.load('scaler.pkl')
df = pd.DataFrame([data])
df = df[FEATURES]
df[NUMERIC_COLS] = scaler.transform(df[NUMERIC_COLS])
pred = model.predict(df)
prob = model.predict_proba(df)[0][1]

This integration provides a functioning front-end to the model, allowing non-technical users, including health workers and patients, to interact with the tool for risk assessment. It confirms that the objective of developing a functional predictive model was not only met but practically realized through deployment.

Conclusion

In summary, both Logistic Regression and Random Forest models were developed and compared. While Logistic Regression offered simplicity, the Random Forest model significantly outperformed it in terms of predictive power and flexibility. The Random Forest model was therefore selected, described in detail, and implemented in a web interface to support real-time hypertension risk prediction. This chapter has demonstrated the successful achievement of the study's second objective.



OBJECTIVE 3 //////////////////////////////////////////////
4.3 Evaluation of the Predictive Model

To fulfill the third objective, the selected Random Forest model was thoroughly evaluated using multiple techniques. The evaluation phase focused on determining how well the model generalizes to unseen data and how consistently it performs across different subsets of the dataset.

On the validation set, the Random Forest model achieved an accuracy of 93%, precision of 96%, recall of 75%, F1-score of 81%, and an AUC-ROC of 0.75. These metrics reflect the model’s solid performance in distinguishing between hypertensive and non-hypertensive cases.

When tested on a held-out test set, which was not used during training or tuning, the model achieved even higher performance scores: an accuracy of 97%, precision of 98%, recall of 88%, F1-score of 92%, and AUC-ROC of 0.88. These results indicate that the model generalizes well and is unlikely to overfit the training data.

Additionally, five-fold cross-validation was conducted to validate the model's reliability across multiple data splits. The average F1-score across the five folds was 0.81, with a standard deviation of 0.18. This further confirms that the model maintains stable performance across different training and validation partitions.

Overall, the evaluation results show that the Random Forest model is both accurate and reliable. It meets the practical needs for predictive hypertension risk assessment and demonstrates readiness for deployment in decision-support systems.


